So it looks as if small groups of men, women and children
made that first push into America about 13,500 years ago.
Using their sophisticated tools,
they made the most of their new home
and spread right across the continent, from coast to coast.
Until recently, this was the version of American
prehistory that most experts agreed on.
But a new discovery here in Texas
is threatening to rewrite the entire story.
Archaeologist Mike Collins is a very patient man.
For 15 years, he's been digging away
in this small field near Austin,
and he's found something that no one expected.
So Mike, what sort of dates have you got coming out here?
We have the entire prehistory of
central Texas represented at this site.
The kinds of artefacts we find
and the few absolute dates that we have
tell us that people were here from 500 years ago
back 13,500 years ago.
Even more importantly, we have stuff below that.
- Below Clovis. So, older than Clovis.
- Older than Clovis. Pre-Clovis.
- Right.
- Right here at this site.
But for years, archaeologists have thought
that Clovis was the first culture in the Americas.
Yeah, most archaeologists have thought that
but there's a few of us that have known better.
And over on the other side of the site,
you can see the Clovis level
and you can see artefacts below it.
You want to see that?
- I'd love to see it.
Let's go see it.
Mike, this is an incredibly deep test pit.
Yes, it's a deep test pit.
And we're really interested in this part of it right here.
Because right through here, we get Clovis artefacts.
But as we dug down, we continued to get artefacts below that
for about 20 or 25 centimetres more.
A nice flake here, for example, with a platform
and good flake scars on it.
We have one date from down here of 14,400 years.
14,400?
Yeah.
So that's pre-Clovis.
By 1,000 years.
I mean, that's amazing because that makes us rethink
all of our theories about early Americans.
Yes, we have to rethink our paradigm.
We have to come up with a new accounting
of the peopling of the Americas.
Mike, how sure are you about the date of these artefacts?
It's just one date.
So you need to corroborate it with further evidence.
And that's what we're working on.
Now, we can only draw tentative conclusions
from the evidence emerging here,
but our grand theory
about how humans first got into North America
is starting to look decidedly dodgy.
Because if there really were people living
here at Gault as early as Mike says they were,
then there must have been another route into the Americas
because the ice-free corridor wasn't open yet.
But what I need is more proof.
And if the claims coming out
of South America are to be believed,
then they may have even earlier and more
compelling evidence than I've seen here in Texas.